
			  A Referee's Plea

			    Mark Allman
			  mallman@bbn.com

			  Mon May 21, 2001


I have just completed my first (maybe only!) stint on the program
committee for ACM SIGCOMM's annual symposium.  While I have refereed
many papers over the years I have never before read so many
submissions in such a short span of time (I filed 20 reviews within
about a month and read/skimmed many more papers).  This experience
was eye-opening in that I now realize that the community generates a
large amount of **junk**.  And, I don't mean "junk" in the sense of
bad ideas.  In general, each paper I reviewed for SIGCOMM this year
had at least a nugget of an interesting idea.  I mean "junk" in the
"it took me twice as long to read this as it should have" sense.  In
other words, the paper was sloppy.  I had a very difficult time
trying to figure out what the paper was proposing or what the
experiments were really showing.  The following is a short list of
*easy* ways to improve your research papers.

Most of the following comments are general and I presume would apply
to any situation where one is attempting to publish scholarly work.
However, the last comment is directed specifically at the
internetworking research community.

1.  Fire Up The Spell Checker, Please!

    I cannot spell either.  I have, however, mastered ispell.  It
    seems to me that everyone has access to a good spell checker
    these days.  Not using the spell checker just indicates that
    either you are sloppy or you do not care.  If you're sloppy with
    your writing why should I believe you are not sloppy with your
    experiments/analysis as well?  If you don't care about your
    paper, why should I?

2.  Sloppy Papers Are Long Shots.

    Proofread your paper.  I see lots of mistakes that indicate the
    paper was not looked over before it was submitted (e.g., "The
    foo algorithm works better than the the bar algorithm.").
    Again, if you do not take enough care in presenting your work,
    why should I be compelled to recommend accepting it?  Sloppy
    papers give the indication of sloppy research.

    As well as reflecting poorly on your work, such papers are often
    very difficult to read and understand.  Presumably, the point of
    writing a paper is to convey new information to the world.
    Therefore, there is major value in clear writing.  If a referee
    can't get the point of the paper, or has a very difficult time
    getting the main idea, there is a high likelihood that the paper
    will be rejected.

3.  I Read Submissions In My Lazy Boy.

    I print out all papers I review.  I read them in my lazy boy.  I
    scribble notes on them.  Do not assume that I am looking at
    color plots!  Color is certainly nice and helps out immensely in
    conference presentations.  But, color plots come out of my black
    and white printer very badly in most cases.  Besides, most
    conferences/journals publish black and white papers.  Make it
    easy for my weary eyes to tell the difference between the lines
    on your plots.  Do not plot on a grey background.  Make the font
    on the plots readable without a magnifying glass.  Help me out!
    Please!  

    Often the plots are key to understanding the paper.  And, at the
    risk of being redundant: If I cannot understand the paper I will
    recommend rejecting it.

4.  Don't Waste My Time I.

    You do not need to give an in-depth tutorial of all background
    material.  I cannot give you a good rule of thumb to help you
    know how much background material to include.  It depends on the
    conference to which you are submitting, the maturity of the
    background work, etc.  But, I can tell you that there are some
    topics (e.g., TCP congestion control) that are well understood
    by people attending any networking conference.  You do not need
    to describe the algorithms in painful detail.  A short paragraph
    re-capping the main ideas and providing references to the
    original works should suffice.

5.  Don't Waste My Time II.

    You do not need to provide me with an example of every kind of
    plotting strategy you use.  When you first show a plot with
    notation that I might not understand, explain the notation.
    But, using half a page to show me a plot that adds nothing to my
    understanding of the topic is a less than compelling use of real
    estate.

6.  Don't Waste My Time III.
    
    Roughly stick to the page limit and the requested format.  Don't
    make me try to guess how long your paper really is because you
    1.75-spaced the paper rather than double-spacing it as requested
    in the call for papers.

    (Note to program committee chairs and journal editors: This
     reviewer's opinion is that if a submission is not obviously in
     the ball-park of the page limit it should be immediately
     returned to the authors until such time that it is in the
     ball-park.) 

7.  Answer All The Easy Questions.  

    If you need a constant for the foo algorithm and you define
    c=17, I want to know why you chose 17.  Also, some items in
    papers jump out at reviewers as odd.  For instance, I was
    recently reviewing a paper that simulated a network with a
    bottleneck bandwidth of "about T1 rate".  The actual rate of the
    link turned out to be something like 1.3 Mbps.  This begs the
    obvious question of why the authors used 1.3 Mbps rather than
    using T1 rate (~1.5 Mbps).  Even if the explanation you end up
    with is rough, it is better than no explanation at all in the
    vast majority of the cases.

8.  Make My Life Easy.

    It is not a super-big deal, but it is always nice to get a paper
    that is easy to read.  This includes things like using a very
    clear font that is of readable size and numbering the pages.

9.  A Little Restraint, Please.

    Your paper does not solve the entire world's networking
    problems.  Really.  Many papers rub reviewers the wrong way by
    making bold claims about solving all sorts of problems without
    any sort of evidence (or only weak evidence).  It is much better
    to show some restraint and perspective when discussing your
    results.  It is alright to solve small problems, or to only show
    preliminary results that *may indicate* a solution.  Just don't
    over claim what you have shown.

10. Use Units.  

    "The length of our data transfers is 1" means nothing.  1 what?
    1 packet?  1 KB?  1 minute?  Sometimes it is obvious from the
    context -- sometimes it isn't.  If you use units you don't have
    to worry about it.

11. We're All Not Mathematicians

    Theorems are quite a necessary part of many papers.  However, it
    is not necessary to give *only* a theorem with no summary or
    context.  Summaries aid me as a reviewer to gain an intuitive
    understanding before trying to dig into the math to make sure
    what you have it correct -- thus making my task easier and less
    error prone, I believe.  As a reader of a paper, I often just
    want the high-order bit without slogging into the theorems and
    proofs to get said bit.

12. On References.

    One common mistake that authors make is failing to include
    relevant references.  It is better to err on the side of citing
    too much related work.  

    Next, when previous work must be criticized, do so in a
    constructive manner.  In other words, do not say something like
    "Zevon's [1] work is easily shown to be less effective than the
    work presented in this paper" -- Mr. Zevon might be reviewing
    your paper!  Something more along the lines of: "Zevon [1] first
    introduced the foo algorithm for decreasing the size of routing
    tables.  We show a more robust algorithm, bar, that goes a step
    further and reduces the size of routing tables by 50% when
    compared to the foo algorithm."

    Finally, do not overstate what a paper you are citing says.  It
    is often better to stick with the author's conclusions and not
    come up with your own.  For instance, many times I see simple
    simulation studies cited as "proving" the algorithm in question
    is safe and works well for the entire Internet.  If one goes
    back to the original paper the conclusion is not nearly as bold,
    often claiming that the simple simulations are an indication
    that the algorithm is workable and that future work on testing
    the algorithm in the Internet is needed.  Overstating previous
    work may make your argument stronger if you are not caught.
    But, when I notice such references they cast your paper in a
    not-so-wonderful light in my eyes.

13. Read These Papers.

    I have noticed that a number of other reviewers are including
    pointers to these two papers in their reviews.

     Mark Allman, Aaron Falk. On the Effective Evaluation of TCP. ACM
     Computer Communication Review, 29(5), October 1999. 
     http://www.icir.org/mallman/papers/tcp-evaluation.pdf

     Sally Floyd and Vern Paxson.  Difficulties in Simulating the
     Internet.  To appear in IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking. 
     http://www.icir.org/vern/papers/sim-difficulty.TON.2001.pdf

    These papers do not necessarily provide hard-and-fast rules for
    how to conduct research.  However, they do provide some
    collected wisdom that should at least be considered in your
    research efforts.
    
    In addition, the following note provides specific guidance on
    getting a paper accepted for presentation at SIGCOMM:

     Craig Partridge. How to Increase the Chances Your Paper is
     Accepted at ACM SIGCOMM. ACM Computer Communication Review,
     28(3), July 1998.
     http://www.acm.org/sigcomm/ccr/archive/1998/jul98/ccr-9807-partridge.html

I don't want to make it sound like I think you need to write
*perfect* papers when submitting to a conference or journal.  A
mis-spelling here or there, an extra word, an extra page, etc. are
all OK.  They will not be cause for your paper to be rejected.  But,
it is surprising how often authors make many of the mistakes listed
above in a single submission.  The bottom line is that if it is
difficult for me to make it through your paper (because the writing
is poor or I can't read the plots or whatever) there is a higher
chance that I will err on the side of recommending that the paper be
rejected.  Furthermore, the above items are *easy* things to fix
when compared with the *hard* task of conducting your investigation.
As I said in the opening, I believe most of the papers I review have
a decent idea -- yet I recommend rejecting the vast majority of the
papers I review.  I believe many papers would have a much better
chance at being accepted if the authors simply take a little more
time in preparing their manuscript.

Several of the items on this list were suggested during discussions
with Vern Paxson.  Additional items for the list are always
welcome. 
